The Governing Body has asked me
to use Proverbs 3:9
as the theme for the message
they would like to be shared
with the entire “household of faith”
this month.
Let’s read that text together,
Proverbs 3:9,
and after we read it we want to consider,
what are “your valuable things”?
And, what does the verse mean
by giving “the firstfruits”?
Let’s read Proverbs 3:9:
“Honor Jehovah
“with your valuable things,
with the firstfruits of all your produce.”
Let’s first talk a little bit
about what it means
to offer our “firstfruits”.
In Bible times,
it meant the earliest fruits of a season.
So way before an Israelite knew
what kind of a harvest he would have,
whether it would be a bumper crop
or very meager returns,
with full faith and confidence
he was to give the “firstfruits” to Jehovah,
not just leftovers
at the end of the harvest season.
Furthermore, the Hebrew word for “firstfruit”
is in the sense of being the best
of that early season.
So the idea conveyed is
not only first chronologically
but also first in quality.
In fact, Exodus 23:19
says this,
it says: “You are to bring the best
“of the first ripe fruits of your ground
to the house of Jehovah your God.”
The ‘best of the firstfuits’
would truly honor Jehovah!
And the Greek term for “firstfuits”
comes from a root word
having the basic meaning of “primacy”
or “preeminence.”
Again, the idea, the best we have.
Proverbs 3:9 also indicated
that we can honor,
or show respect and appreciation for Jehovah,
with our “valuable things.”
And, as stated at Revelation 4:11,
‘Jehovah is truly worthy
of all the honor’ we can give him.
Not only do we owe it to him
because he is our Creator,
he is worthy of it
because of the kind of God he is.
But what are the “valuable things”
with which we can honor Jehovah?
What first might come to mind
are our material possessions, our finances.
Well that is true,
and we want to talk about this
a little bit later.
But there are many other valuables
that a Christian can offer to Jehovah
to give him the honor that he is worthy of.
For example, our time!
Mr. Benjamin Franklin,
a scientist and statesman, once said:
“Do not squander time,
for that is the stuff life is made of.”
Yes, time is a valuable resource,
and many of you dear ones
are offering your valuable time
in the ministry each month.
Some of you are able to gift to Jehovah
70 or more hours a month
in the ministry as regular pioneers.
While others of us
are not in a position
to spend that amount of time
in the field ministry,
we rejoice with those who can.
And interestingly,
under the Law given to Moses,
the quantity of “firstfruits” to be offered
was not fixed.
It was left to the generosity
and circumstances
of the giver.
He was to give his best, though,
no matter how much
or how little that proved to be.
No matter what the amount then,
can we give the “firstfruits”
of our time in the ministry?
We do this by scheduling
some time early in the month,
not just leftovers
the last few days of the month.
Remember, we give Jehovah our “firstfruits.”
What other valuable things do we possess
that we can give to Jehovah,
thus honoring him?
Well, many have construction skills
and other talents
that they are willing to offer
for the building of Kingdom Halls,
Assembly Halls, remote translation offices,
and branch facilities
—including the large
world headquarters complex
in Warwick, New York.
Jehovah is magnified
by such voluntary contributions
of energy and skills.
These are truly valuable things.
But now, I would like to address
the valuable things
that may have first come to mind
—material possessions
or financial giving and support.
As you know, for over 130 years
this organization
has never solicited for funds,
and it is certainly not going to start now.
We don’t send out monthly statements
to each one of Jehovah’s Witnesses
specifying a dollar amount
that should be submitted
to finance the work worldwide.
Most donations, in fact,
are contributed anonymously.
Over the years,
I have told various Bible students
that a person
could attend our meetings for 20 years
and never put a penny
in the contribution box,
and we would not know it.
Jehovah, of course, would know it,
but we would not,
because the donations
are anonymous but from the heart.
We don’t know who gives what.
But for a certainty, any donations received
do not line anyone’s pockets
and are not misappropriated.
They are all used in supporting
theocratic endeavors worldwide.
As described in Matthew 24:45-47,
the Governing Body
prayerfully and sincerely endeavors
to be not only the “faithful slave”
but also the “discreet slave”
in wisely managing the Master’s resources.
And please, dear brothers and sisters,
pray for Jehovah to help us to be successful
in being not only “faithful”
but also “discreet.”
But often a member of the Governing Body
will be heard to say:
“In spending Jehovah’s money,
“we have to be more careful than we are
in spending our own money.”
And that is truly
how we feel about the matter!
Yet, as you can well imagine,
millions of dollars are required each month
to finance the colossal Kingdom work
that is being supported by this organization
in some 239 lands.
Where does
all of the financial support come from?
Largely from you dear brothers and sisters.
Most funds come from what you voluntarily put
in the contribution box in your Kingdom Hall.
Yes, that little box with a slot
that is labeled “Worldwide Work”
is primarily what finances
all of the theocratic initiatives
that have been implemented.
Of course, there are many other ways
to contribute as explained, usually,
in the November issue
of The Watchtower  each year.
Sometimes we may feel a little shy
to talk about the financial needs
of the organization.
That is understandable
because we in no way want to be categorized
with other organizations,
religious and otherwise,
that coerce their supporters to donate.
However, because all of us
have the privilege to donate funds,
we would like to let you know something
about our current situation.
Then you can respond
as your heart impels you.
As you might have sensed,
I am not shy about this subject.
And why not?
It is because we have
many Scriptural examples
of Jehovah’s faithful servants
making known the financial needs
of the congregation.
Only when supporters
of the Kingdom know the needs
can they respond accordingly.
For example, turn with me, please,
to Exodus chapter 35.
Now, think about this
as you’re turning there:
The Israelites were in Sinai.
They were marching through a wilderness.
They did not have fields
or businesses with money flowing in.
They just had
what they had brought with them
when leaving Egypt.
Nevertheless, Jehovah instructed them
to build a place of worship.
Was Jehovah shy
about letting the people know
about the material needs?
Well, read with me Exodus 35,
verses 4 and 5:
“Moses then said to the entire assembly
of the Israelites:
‘This is what Jehovah
has commanded.’”
That wasn’t Moses’ command.
“This is what Jehovah has commanded,
“‘Take up a contribution for Jehovah
“‘from among yourselves.
“‘Let everyone with a willing heart
“‘bring a contribution for Jehovah:
gold, silver, copper.’”
You see, the people
would not have known this need
if Jehovah had not informed them.
Very interesting, is it not?
The Governing Body
very much feels the urgency
of accomplishing
as much as we possibly can
in behalf of Kingdom interests
—knowing that “the great day of Jehovah
is near!”
So in an effort to keep you informed
of the support that is needed
for this great work,
I have the following information to share.
We have looked forward
to this next fiscal year
and projected the expenditures
for all of the theocratic initiatives
we are scheduling.
In doing the math,
we found
that the amount of money flowing out
will be much greater
than the amount of money
that we have coming in at this time.
Well, why is that?
Does this represent
a lack of appreciation for spiritual things?
No, absolutely not!
To the contrary,
we are witnessing unprecedented enthusiasm
among the brotherhood
for all the spiritual bounty
that is coming our way.
We have up-to-date Bibles
and an abundance of printed literature,
and there is so much appreciation
for the new and continually improving
jw.org website.
From around the world,
we receive letters
thanking the Governing Body
for JW Broadcasting®.
Many comment that it has brought us
closer together as a people.
And as mentioned,
starting this month
JW Broadcasting is available
in multiple languages.
We are thrilled about this development.
There is also excitement
about public witnessing
using literature carts
—and with such great success.
No, the financial circumstance
has nothing to do
with a lack of spirituality
or appreciation.
However, there are some facts
that we want to make you aware of.
For one thing,
the financial needs in the field
have accelerated at a pace
unlike any time in the recent past.
A recent analysis
of the need for Kingdom Halls
here in the United States showed
that some 1,600 new Kingdom Halls
or major renovations are needed,
not sometime in the future, but right now.
And worldwide we are in need
of more than 14,000 places of worship,
not including ongoing future growth.
In the past 15 years,
30,000 Kingdom Halls have been built.
Now if you figure that up, that averages
to about 2,000 Kingdom Halls every year.
But in an effort to relieve
the serious backlog more quickly,
we intend
—Jehovah willing—
to complete 3,000 Kingdom Hall projects
every year going forward.
That’s a 50 percent increase.
Additionally, adjustments are being made
to simplify the Kingdom Hall design
in order to accelerate
the construction schedule
and to save funds.
Though the design will be simplified,
the sheer number of Kingdom Halls
requires considerably more funds
in the budget
than in times past.
Additionally, please think about this:
Today, how many publishing companies
print publications in the many languages
that Jehovah’s organization does?
The answer: None!
And why is that?
It’s because
they cannot make a financial profit.
We, however, are accelerating our method
of translating publications
into indigenous languages.
This involves building or purchasing
regional translation offices,
or RTOs.
These will be strategically located
in the part of a country
with the highest concentration
of native speakers of the language.
Providing these structures
in various regions of a country
reduces the need
for costly construction expansion
at the local branch office.
But in the next two years, however,
upwards
—now think about this—
of 170 of such facilities,
RTOs, are needed.
Depending on the country
and the cost of materials,
an RTO can cost from about $1,000,000
to several million dollars each.
Hence, we have another reason
we need to increase our finances.
We just felt
that you dear brothers and sisters
needed to be made aware
of these expenditures
that we are facing
in the coming months and years.
We also have heard
from circuit overseers and others
that some of the brothers and sisters
may have a misconception
about some of the recent policy changes
that have been instituted.
For example, all congregations
that had a Kingdom Hall
or Assembly Hall loan to pay off
were informed
that their mortgages were canceled.
Now if you think about that,
that’s amazing, isn’t it?
All their loans were canceled.
Can you imagine a bank telling homeowners
that all their loans were canceled
and that they should merely
send in to the bank each month
whatever they can afford?
Only in Jehovah’s organization
could such a thing happen.
However,
according to some of our circuit overseers,
some of us took this to mean
that the organization had a surplus of funds
and thus took this action,
as if the loans
did not need to be reimbursed.
Could this misconception
have affected the amount
that some
have chosen to donate each month?
In actuality, the mortgages were canceled
so as not to be a hardship
on some congregations and circuits.
The policy was founded
on the Scriptural principle stated
in 2 Corinthians chapter 8.
Please turn there with me.
In an effort to help fellow Christians
who were facing
financial hardship in the first century,
an arrangement had been put in place
to accept contributions from others
to help offset the deficiency.
About a year later,
Paul is again writing to the Corinthians
about this policy of contributing
to offset the financial needs of others.
Now please read with me
2 Corinthians chapter 8,
and we’re going to read verses 10-15.
Here, the apostle Paul,
under inspiration, said this,
verse 10:
“And in this I give my opinion:
“This is for your benefit,
“seeing that already a year ago
“you not only initiated the action
[that is of contributing]
“but also showed your desire to do it.
“So now, also complete
what you started to do,
“so that your readiness to act
[or contribute]
may be completed according to,”
now notice, “the means you have available.
“For if the readiness is there first,
“it is especially acceptable
“according to what a person has,
“not according to
what a person does not have.
“For I do not want
to make it easy for others,
“but difficult for you;
“but that by means of an equalizing,
“your surplus at the present time
“might offset their need,
“so that their surplus
“might also offset your deficiency,
“that there may be an equalizing.
“Just as it is written:
“‘The person with much
did not have too much,
and the person with little
did not have too little.’”
So that was the Scriptural basis
for canceling all loan repayments.
It was not because the organization
had a large surplus of funds
and thus could “afford”
to cancel these mortgages.
As explained at the time,
it was to equalize
the reimbursement of such expenditures
over the entire brotherhood.
Some businessmen in the secular world
might think this
was a disastrous policy change.
However, we know
the spirit of Jehovah’s faithful servants.
We all feel privileged
to be able to help the growing brotherhood
to have comfortable places to meet
and praise Jehovah.
Think about this comparison:
Back in 1990 when the decision was made
to distribute our literature free of charge,
some within the organization,
and many outside the organization,
thought this would be financial suicide.
However, you dear brothers and sisters
have proved those predictions
completely wrong!
Jesus said at Matthew 11:19:
“All the same,
wisdom is proved righteous
by its works.”
Our individual voluntary donations
have combined to take care of the cost
associated with producing our literature,
and we are confident
that the same will prove true
regarding the decision
to cancel all Kingdom Hall
and Assembly Hall loans.
So instead of conveying the message
that the organization
needed less in the way of donations,
the intent was really just the opposite.
But we have confidence that our hearts
will be moved to contribute
what we can each month
to offset the necessary expense
of building new meeting places
for our brothers worldwide.
Another misimpression
that has been brought to our attention
is that the sale of property in New York City
means that fewer donations are needed.
To help put things
in proper perspective, however,
selling one of the significant properties
in New York
really only covered the operating expenses
for the worldwide work for a few weeks
—now that’s one significant property.
And in actuality,
the sale of property in New York City
is basically only financing the construction
of the world headquarters in Warwick
and the purchase of other properties
that are needed to facilitate the move
from Brooklyn in the future.
But on top of that, as mentioned,
we are planning on accelerating
the building of Kingdom Halls
and Remote Translation Offices
in coming years.
It is our desire, Jehovah willing,
to hold to the accelerated schedule
for these projects, if at all possible,
rather than have to scale back such progress
because of a lack of available funds.
Again, we are not in any way desirous
of creating a hardship on anyone.
However, we felt
that if you knew
the circumstances accurately
you would apply Proverbs 3:27
to this situation.
There we’re encouraged
not to ‘withhold what is good,’
but then the scripture adds,
‘if it is within our power to help.’
And I might mention that this is true
even of publishers
in less affluent countries.
It is encouraging to note
that even in lands with limited resources
the very poor contribute
to the cost of their Kingdom Hall
and its maintenance.
We’re all Jehovah’s united people.
Even if we do not have much materially,
if our heart is willing,
there is usually something we can do
—even if it is merely offering
“two small coins of very little value”
as the poor widow did.
And how did Jesus feel about her
for doing this?
He highly praised her
in Mark 12:42-44.
And if we think about it,
a small donation
from each of many of Jehovah’s people
adds up to a large amount of dedicated funds
that can be used powerfully
by Jehovah’s organization.
Please turn back to Exodus chapter 35.
As mentioned, Jehovah was not shy
about informing his people
of the financial needs for true worship.
But once the need was known,
what was the initial result?
Exodus 35, and let’s read verse 21,
and the first part of verse 22:
“Then everyone whose heart impelled him
“and everyone whose spirit incited him
“came and brought
“their contribution for Jehovah
“to be used for the tent of meeting,
“for all its service,
and for the holy garments.
“They kept coming,
the men along with the women,
each with a willing heart.”
And what were the final results?
Well, look at Exodus chapter 36
and we’re going to read verse 7.
Let’s see, did Jehovah
have to scale back on the amount of work
because of a lack of material support?
Verse 7:
“The goods were enough
“for all the work to be done,
and more than enough.”
Yes, when the hearts of Jehovah’s people
are motivated,
wonderful things happen!
The Governing Body
wanted to make you aware
of the financial needs in the world field.
And we are confident
that with this knowledge
your appreciative hearts
will move you to do what you can
to support the work at hand.
Yes, we can honor Jehovah
with our valuable things,
including the financial support
of true worship.
But as we mentioned at the outset,
our valuable things include much more
—for example, our time,
as we talked about, spent in the ministry.
May we all give our individual firstfruits,
the best we can do
with our present circumstances.
Some are honoring Jehovah
by moving to places
where the need for Kingdom preachers
is greater.
That’s commendable!
We spoke of giving our skills and energy
to theocratic construction projects.
We appreciate all of you
who have honored Jehovah
in this way in the past,
tirelessly working
with Regional Building Committees
and in the
Lands With Limited Resources program.
And we thank all of you
who will continue to support
the construction of buildings
that will bring praise to Jehovah.
What other valuable things
bring honor to Jehovah?
Many thousands are learning new languages
to be able to help spread the good news
to yet more deserving ones.
It may well be
—now think about this—
that this organization
has the most multi-lingual speakers
of any organization on earth.
That’s amazing, isn’t it?
Still others honor Jehovah
by expending themselves
on Hospital Liaison Committees
and Patient Visitation Groups.
Though you do so,
often behind the scenes with no limelight,
be assured that those you help
know what you do,
and the Sovereign of the universe
sees you and receives your gift honorably.
It is just as is stated at Hebrews 6:10:
‘Jehovah does not forget your work
‘and the love you showed for his name
‘by ministering
and continuing to minister
to the holy ones.’
There are also circuit overseers
and Bethel family members around the earth
who give their best to Jehovah daily.
Some of you are faithful caregivers
of sick or elderly servants of Jehovah.
There is a wear factor
that is hard to quantify.
But know that your God accepts
such a gift of love
with full knowledge of what you have done.
Well, at this point,
I will borrow the words of Paul
as he enumerated in Hebrews chapter 11
many men and women of faith,
but then said as recorded in verse 32:
“And what more will I say?
For time will fail me
if I go on to relate about . . . ”
and then he listed others
who had honored Jehovah
with their valuable things.
Similarly, time would fail us
if we tried to enumerate
all of you dear ones
and all of the many ways
you are honoring Jehovah
with your valuable things.
But may Jehovah continue to bless
each and every one of you who are doing so!